FEDERALIST 45 
A Further Discussion of the Supposed Danger fr om the Powers of the Union to the State 
Governments  
by James Madison 
HAVING shown that no one of the powers transferred to the federal government is unnecessary or 
improper, the next question to be considered is, wh ether the whole mass of them will be dangerous 
to the portion of authority left in the several States.  
The adversaries to the plan of the convention, inst ead of considering in the first place what degree 
of power was absolutely necessary for the purposes of the federal government, have exhausted themselves in a secondary inquiry into the possi ble consequences of the proposed degree of power 
to the governments of the particular States. But if the Union, as has been shown, be essential to the 
security of the people of America against foreign da nger; if it be essential to their security against 
contentions and wars among the di fferent States; if it be essential to guard them against those 
violent and oppressive factions which embitter the blessings of liberty, and against those military 
establishments which must gradually poison its very  fountain; if, in a word, the Union be essential 
to the happiness of the people of America, is it not preposterous, to urge as an objection to a 
government, without which the objects of the Union cannot be attained, that such a government 
may derogate from the importance of the government s of the individual States. Was, then, the 
American Revolution effected, was the American Confederacy formed, was the precious blood of 
 154thousands spilt, and the hard-earned substance of mi llions lavished, not that the people of America 
should enjoy peace, liberty, and safety, but that the government of the individual States, that 
particular municipal establishments, might enjoy a certain extent of power, and be arrayed with certain dignities and attributes of sovereignty? We  have heard of the impious doctrine in the Old 
World, that the people were made for kings, not kings for the people. Is the same doctrine to be 
revived in the New, in another shape- that the solid happiness of the people is to be sacrificed to the 
views of political institutions of a different form? Is it too early for politicians to presume on our 
forgetting that the public good, the real welfare of  the great body of the people, is the supreme 
object to be pursued; and that no form of government whatever has any other value than as it may 
be fitted for the attainment of this object. Were the plan of the convention adverse to the public 
happiness, my voice would be, Reject the plan. Were the Union itself inconsistent with the public 
happiness, it would be, Abolish the Union. In like manner, as far as the sovereignty of the States 
cannot be reconciled to the happiness of the people , the voice of every good citizen must be, Let the 
former be sacrificed to the latter. How far the sacrifice is necessary, has been shown. How far the 
unsacrificed residue will be endangered, is the question before us.  
Several important considerations have been touched in the course of these papers, which 
discountenance the supposition that the operation of  the federal government will by degrees prove 
fatal to the State governments. The more I revolve the subject, the more fully I am persuaded that 
the balance is much more likely to be disturbed by the preponderancy of the last than of the first scale.  
We have seen, in all the examples of ancient and moderate confederacies, the strongest tendency 
continually betraying itself in the members, to despoil the general government of its authorities, 
with a very ineffectual capacity in the latter to defend itself against the encroachments. Although, in 
most of these examples, the system has been so dissimilar from that under consideration as greatly 
to weaken any inference concerning the latter from the fate of the former, yet, as the States will retain, under the proposed Constitution, a very extensive portion of active sovereignty, the inference 
ought not to be wholly disregarded. In the Achaean league it is probable that the federal head had a 
degree and species of power, which gave it a considerable likeness to the government framed by the 
convention. The Lycian Confederacy, as far as its principles and form are transmitted, must have 
borne a still greater analogy to it. Yet history does not inform us that either of them ever degenerated, or tended to degenerate, into one consolidated government. On the contrary, we know 
that the ruin of one of them proceeded from the incapacity of the federal authority to prevent the 
dissensions, and finally the disunion, of the subor dinate authorities. Th ese cases are the more 
worthy of our attention, as the external cases by which the component parts were pressed together 
were much more numerous and powerful than in our case; and consequently less powerful 
ligaments within would be sufficient to bind the members to the head, and to each other.  
In the feudal system, we have seen a similar pr opensity exemplified. Notwithstanding the want of 
proper sympathy in every instance between the local sovereigns and the people, and the sympathy 
in some instances between the general sovereign and the latter, it usually happened that the local 
sovereigns prevailed in the rivalship for encroach ments. Had no external dangers enforced internal 
harmony and subordination, and particularly, had th e local sovereigns possessed the affections of 
the people, the great kingdoms in Europe would at this time consist of as many independent princes 
as there were formerly feudatory barons.  
 155The State governments will have the advantage of the Federal government, whether we compare 
them in respect to the immediate dependence of the one on the other; to the weight of personal 
influence which each side will possess; to the powers respectively vested in them; to the predilection and probable support of the people; to  the disposition and faculty of resisting and 
frustrating, the measure of each other.  
The State governments may be regarded as cons tituent and essential parts of the federal 
government; whilst the latter is nowise essential to the operation or organization of the former. 
Without the intervention of the State legislatures, the President of the United States cannot be 
elected at all. They must in all cases have a gr eat share in his appointment, and will, perhaps, in 
most cases, of themselves determine it. The Senate will be elected absolutely and exclusively by the State legislatures. Even the House of Representa tives, though drawn immediately from the people, 
will be chosen very much under the influence of th at class of men, whose influence over the people 
obtains for themselves an election into the State legislatures. Thus, each of the principal branches of 
the federal government will owe its existence more or less to the favor of the State governments, 
and must consequently feel a dependence, which is much more likely to beget a disposition too obsequious than too overbearing towards them. On the other side, the component parts of the State 
governments will in no instance be indebted for their appointment to the direct agency of the federal government, and very little, it at all, to the local influence of its members.  
The number of individuals employed under the Constitution of the United States will be much 
smaller than the number employed under the particul ar States. There will consequently be less of 
personal influence on the side of the former than of the latter. The members of the legislative, 
executive, and judiciary departments of thirteen and more States, the justices of peace, officers of militia, ministerial officers of justice, with all the county, corporation, and town officers, for three 
millions and more of people, intermixed, and having particular acquaintance with every class and 
circle of people, must exceed, beyond all proportion, both in number and influence, those of every description who will be employed in the administration of the federal system. Compare the 
members of the three great departments of th e thirteen States, excluding from the judiciary 
department the justices of peace, with the members of the corresponding departments of the single 
government of the Union; compare the militia officer s of three millions of people with the military 
and marine officers of any establishment which is within the compass of probability, or, I may add 
of possibility, and in this view alone, we may pronounce the advantage of the States to be decisive.  
If the federal government is to have collectors of revenue, the State governments will have theirs 
also. And as those of the former will be principally  on the sea-coast, and not very numerous, whilst 
those of the latter will be spread over the face of the country, and will be very numerous, the 
advantage in this view also lies on the same side. It is true, that the Confederacy is to possess, and 
may exercise, the power of collecting internal as well as external taxes throughout the States; but it 
is probable that this power will not be resorted to, except for supplemental purposes of revenue; than an option will then be given to the States to supply their quotas by previous collections of their 
own; and that the eventual collection, under the imme diate authority of the Union, will generally be 
made by the officers, and according to the rules,  appointed by the several States. Indeed it is 
extremely probable, that in other instances, particul arly in the organization of the judicial power, the 
officers of the States will be clothed with the correspondent authority of the Union. Should it happen, however, that separate collectors of inte rnal revenue should be appointed under the federal 
government, the influence of the whole number w ould not bear a comparison with that of the 
 156multitude of State officers in the opposite scale. Within every district to which a federal collector 
would be allotted, there would not be less than thirty or forty, or even more, officers of different 
descriptions, and many of them persons of character and weight, whose influence would lie on the 
side of the State.  
The powers delegated by the proposed Constitution to  the federal government are few and defined. 
Those which are to remain in the State governments are numerous and indefinite. The former will 
be exercised principally on external objects, as wa r, peace, negotiation, and foreign commerce; with 
which last the power of taxation will, for the most  part, be connected. The powers reserved to the 
several States will extend to all the objects which,  in the ordinary course of affairs; concern the 
lives, liberties, and properties of the people and th e internal order, improvement, and prosperity of 
the State.  
The operations of the federal government will be most extensive and important in times of war and 
danger; those of the State governments in times of  peace and security. As the former periods will 
probably bear a small proportion to the latter , the State governments will here enjoy another 
advantage over the federal government. The more adequate, indeed, the federal powers may be 
rendered to the national defence, the less frequent w ill be those scenes of danger which might favor 
their ascendancy over the governments of the particular States.  
If the new Constitution be examined with accuracy and candor, it will be found that the change 
which it proposes consists much less in the addition of NEW POWERS to the Union, than in the invigoration of its ORIGINAL powers. The regulations  of commerce, it is true, is a new power; but 
that seems to be an addition which few oppose, and from which no apprehensions are entertained. 
The powers relating to war and peace, armies and fleets, treaties and finance, with the other more 
considerable powers, are all vested in the existing  Congress by the articles of Confederation. The 
proposed change does not enlarge these powers; it only substitutes a more effectual mode of 
administering them. The change relating to taxation may be regarded as the most important; and yet 
the present Congress have as complete authority to REQUIRE of the States indefinite supplies of 
money for the common defence and general welfare, as the future Congress will have to require 
them of individual citizens; and the latter will be no more bound than the States themselves have 
been, to pay the quotas respectively taxed on them. Had the States complied punctually with the 
articles of Confederation, or could their compliance have been enforced by as peaceable means as 
many be used with success towards single pers ons, our past experience is very far from 
countenancing an opinion, that the State government s would have lost their constitutional powers, 
and have gradually undergone an entire consolidation. To maintain that such an event would have 
ensued, would be to say at once, that the existence of the State governments is incompatible with any system whatever that accomplishes the essential purposes of the Union.  
PUBLIUS 
 
 
  
 
 
 157