FEDERALIST 40 
The Same Objectio n Further Examined  
by James Madison 
THE second point to be examined is whether the convention were authorized to frame and propose 
this mixed Constitution.  
The powers of the convention ought, in strictness, to be determined by an inspection of the 
commissions given to the members by their respective constituents. As all of these, however, had 
reference, either to the recommendation from the meeting at Annapolis, in September, 1786, or to 
that from Congress, in February, 1787, it will be sufficient to recur to these particular acts.  
The act from Annapolis recommends the "appointment of commissioners to take into consideration 
the situation of the United States; to devise such further provisions as shall appear to them 
necessary to render the Constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the 
Union; and to report such an act for that purpose, to the United States in Congress assembled, as when agreed to by them, and afterwards confirmed by  the legislature of every State, will effectually 
provide for the same."  
The recommendatory act of Congress is in the wo rds following: "Whereas, there is provision in the 
articles of Confederation and perpetual Union, for making alterations therein, by the assent of a 
Congress of the United States, and of the legislatur es of the several States; and whereas experience 
hath evinced that there are defects in the present C onfederation; as a mean to remedy which, several 
of the States, and particularly the State of New Yo rk, by express instructions to their delegates in 
Congress, have suggested a convention for the purpos es expressed in the following resolution; and 
such convention appearing to be the most probable  mean of establishing in these States a firm 
national government:  
"Resolved, - That in the opinion of Congress it is expedient, that on the second Monday of May 
next a convention of delegates, who shall have b een appointed by the several States, be held at 
Philadelphia, for the sole and express purpose of revising the articles of Confederation, and 
 129reporting to Congress and the several legislatures su ch alterations and provisions therein, as shall, 
when agreed to in Congress, and confirmed by th e States, render the federal Constitution adequate 
to the exigencies of government and the preservation of the Union."  
From these two acts, it appears, 1st, that the object of the convention was to establish, in these 
States, a firm national government; 2nd, that this government was to be such as would be adequate to the exigencies of government and the preservation of the Union; 3rd, that these purposes were to 
be effected by alterations and provisions in the article s of Confederation, as it is expressed in the act 
of Congress, or by such further provisions as  should appear necessary, as it stands in the 
recommendatory act from Annapolis; 4th, that the alterations and provisions were to be reported to 
Congress, and to the States, in order to be agreed to by the former and confirmed by the latter.  
From a comparison and fair construction of these se veral modes of expression, is to be deduced the 
authority under which the convention acted. They were to frame a national government, adequate to the exigencies of government, and of the Union, and to reduce the articles of Confederation into 
such form as to accomplish these purposes.  
There are two rules of construction, dictated by plain reason, as well as founded on legal axioms. 
The one is, that every part of the expression ought, if possible, to be allowed some meaning, and be 
made to conspire to some common end. The other is, that where the several parts cannot be made to 
coincide, the less important should give way to the more important part; the means should be sacrificed to the end, rather than the end to the means.  
Suppose, then, that the expressions defining the aut hority of the convention were irreconcilably at 
variance with each other; that a national and adequate government could not possibly, in the 
judgment of the convention, be effected by alterations and provisions in the articles of 
Confederation; which part of the definition ought to have been embraced, and which rejected? 
Which was the more important, which was the less important part? Which the end; which the means? Let the most scrupulous expositors of dele gated powers; let the most inveterate objectors 
against those exercised by the convention, answer these questions. Let them declare, whether it was 
of most importance to the happiness of the people  of America, that the articles of Confederation 
should be disregarded, and an adequate government be provided, and the Union preserved; or that 
an adequate government should be omitted, and the articles of Confederati on preserved. Let them 
declare, whether the preservation of these articles  was the end, for securing which a reform of the 
government was to be introduced as the means; or whether the establishment of a government, 
adequate to the national happiness, was the end at which these articles themselves originally aimed, 
and to which they ought, as insufficient means, to have been sacrificed.  
But is it necessary to suppose that these expressions are absolute irreconcilable to each other; that 
no alterations or provisions in the articles of the Confederation could possibly mound them into a 
national and adequate government; into such a government as had been proposed by the 
convention?  
No stress, it is presumed, will, in this case, be laid on the title; a change of that could never be 
deemed an exercise of ungranted power. Alterations in the body of the instrument are expressly 
authorized. New provisions therein are also expressly authorized. Here then is a power to change 
the title; to insert new articles; to alter old ones. Mu st it of necessity be admitted that this power is 
 130infringed, so long as a part of the old articles re main? Those who maintain the affirmative ought at 
least to mark the boundary between the authorized and usurped innovations; between the degree of 
change which lies within the compass of alterations and further provisions, and that which amounts to a transmutation of the government. Will it be said that the alterations ought not to have touched 
the substance of the Confederation? The States would never have appointed a convention with so 
much solemnity, nor described it objects with so much latitude, if some substantial reform had not 
been in contemplation. Will it be said that the f undamental principles of the Confederation were not 
within the purview of the convention, and ought not  to have been varied? I ask, What are these 
principles? Do they require that, in the establishment of the Constitution, the States should be 
regarded as distinct and independent sovereigns? They are so regarded by the Constitution 
proposed. Do they require that the members of the government should derive their appointment 
from the legislatures, not from the people of the States? One branch of the new government is to be 
appointed by these legislatures; and under the Confed eration, the delegates to Congress may all be 
appointed immediately by the people, and in two States
28 are actually so appointed. Do they require 
that the powers of the government should act on the States, and not immediately on individuals? In 
some instances, as has been shown, the powers of the new government will act on the States in their 
collective characters. In some instances, also, those of the existing government act immediately on 
individuals. In cases of capture; of piracy; of the post office; of coins, weights, and measures; of 
trade with the Indians; of claims under grants of land by different States; and, above all, in the case 
of trials by courts-martial in the army and na vy, by which death may be inflicted without the 
intervention of a jury, or even of a civil magistrate;-in all these cases the powers of the Confederation operate immediately on the persons and interests of individual citizens. Do these 
fundamental principles require, pa rticularly, that no tax should be levied without the intermediate 
agency of the States? The Confederation itself authorizes a direct tax, to a certain extent, on the post 
office. The power of coinage has been so construed by Congress as to levy a tribute immediately 
from that source also. But pretermitting these instances, was it not an acknowledged object of the convention and the universal expectation of the pe ople, that the regulation of trade should be 
submitted to the general government in such a form as would render it an immediate source of general revenue? Had not Congress repeatedly recommended this measure as not inconsistent with 
the fundamental principles of the Confederation?  Had not every State but one; had not New York 
herself, so far complied with the plan of Congre ss as to recognize the principle of the innovation? 
Do these principles, in fine, require that the powers of the general government should be limited, 
and that, beyond this limit, the States should be left in possession of their sovereignty and 
independence? We have seen that in the new government, as in the old, the general powers are 
limited; and that the States, in all unenumerated cases, are left in the enjoyment of their sovereign and independent jurisdiction.  
The truth is that the great principles of the Constitution proposed by the convention may be 
considered less as absolutely new, than as th e expansion of principles which are found in the 
articles of Confederation. The misfortune under the latter system has been, that these principles are 
so feeble and confined as to justify all the charges of inefficiency which have been urged against it, 
and to require a degree of enlargement which give s to the new system the aspect of an entire 
transformation of the old.  
                                                 
28 Connecticut and Rhode Island.  
 131In one particular it is admired that the conventi on have departed from the tenor of their commission. 
Instead of reporting a plan requiring the confirmation of the legislatures of all the States, they have 
reported a plan which is to be confirmed by the peopl e, and may be carried into effect by nine States 
only. It is worthy of remark that this objection, though the most plausible, has been the least urged 
in the publications which have swarmed against the convention. The forbearance can only have 
proceeded from an irresistible conviction of the absu rdity of subjecting the fate of twelve States to 
the perverseness or corruption of a thirteenth; fr om the example of inflexible opposition given by a 
majority of one sixtieth of the people of America to a measure approved and called for by the voice of twelve States, comprising fifty-nine sixtieths of the people - an example still fresh in the memory 
and indignation of every citizen who has felt for the wounded honor and prosperity of his country. 
As this objection, therefore, has been in a mann er waived by those who has criticised the powers of 
the convention, I dismiss it without further observation.  
The third point to be inquired into is, how far considerations of duty arising out of the case itself 
could have supplied any defect of regular authority.  
In the preceding inquiries the powers of the convention have been analyzed and tried with the same 
rigor, and by the same rules, as if they had been  real and final powers for the establishment of a 
Constitution for the United States. We have seen in what manner they have borne the trial even on that supposition. It is time now to recollect that the powers were merely advisory and 
recommendatory; that they were so meant by the States, and so understood by the convention; and 
that the latter have accordingly planned and propos ed a Constitution which is to be of no more 
consequence than the paper on which it is written,  unless it be stamped with the approbation of 
those to whom it is addressed. This reflection pl aces the subject in a point of view, altogether 
different, and will enable us to judge with propriety of the course taken by the convention.  
Let us view the ground on which the convention stood. It may be collected from their proceedings, 
that they were deeply and unanimously impressed with the crisis which had led their country almost 
with one voice to make so singular and solemn an experiment for correcting the errors of a system 
by which this crisis had been produced; that they were no less deeply and unanimously convinced 
that such a reform as they have proposed was absolutely necessary to effect the purposes of their 
appointment. It could not be unknown to them that the hopes and expectations of the great body of 
citizens, throughout this great empire, were turned  with the keenest anxiet y to the event of their 
deliberations. They had every reason to believe that the contrary sentiments agitated the minds and 
bosoms of every external and internal foe to the li berty and prosperity of the United States. They 
had seen in the origin and progress of the experiment, the alacrity with which the proposition, made 
by a single State (Virginia), towards a partial amen dment of the Confederation, had been attended 
to and promoted. They had seen the liberty assumed by a very few deputies from a very few States, 
convened at Annapolis, of recommending a great and critical object, wholly foreign to their 
commission, not only justified by the public opinion,  but actually carried into effect by twelve out 
of the thirteen States. They had seen, in a variety of instances, assumptions by Congress, not only of 
recommendatory, but of operative, powers, warrante d, in the public estimation, by occasions and 
objects infinitely less urgent than those by which their conduct was to be governed. They must have 
reflected, that in all great changes of estab lished governments, forms ought to give way to 
substance; that a rigid adherence in such cases to the former, would render nominal and nugatory the transcendent and precious right of the people to  "abolish or alter their governments as to them 
 132shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness,"29 since it is impossible for the people 
spontaneously and universally to move in concert towards their object; and it is therefore essential 
that such changes be instituted by some informal and unauthorized propositions, made by some patriotic and respectable citizen or number of citi zens. They must have recollected that it was by 
this irregular and assumed privilege of proposing to the people plans for their safety and happiness, 
that the States were first united against the danger with which they were threatened by their ancient 
government; that committees and congresses were  formed for concentrating their efforts and 
defending their rights; and that conventions were el ected in the several States for establishing the 
constitutions under which they are now governed; nor could it have been forgotten that no little ill-
timed scruples, no zeal for adhering to ordinary forms, were anywhere seen, except in those who 
wished to indulge, under these masks, their secret enmity to the substance contended for. They must 
have borne in mind, that as the plan to be framed and proposed was to be submitted to the people 
themselves, the disapprobation of this supreme aut hority would destroy it forever; its approbation 
blot out antecedent errors and irregularities. It  might even have occurred to them, that where a 
disposition to cavil prevailed, their neglect to execute the degree of power vested in them, and still 
more their recommendation of any measure whatever, not warranted by their commission, would 
not less excite animadversion, than a recommenda tion at once of a measure fully commensurate to 
the national exigencies.  
Had the convention, under all these impressions, and in the midst of all these considerations, instead 
of exercising a manly confidence in their country, by whose confidence they had been so peculiarly 
distinguished, and of pointing out a system capable, in their judgment, of securing its happiness, 
taken the cold and sullen resolution of disappointing its ardent hopes, of sacrificing substance to 
forms, of committing the dearest interests of their country to the uncertainties of delay and the hazard of events, let me ask the man who can raise his mind to one elevated conception, who can 
awaken in his bosom one patriotic emotion, what judgment ought to have been pronounced by the 
impartial world, by the friends of mankind, by ev ery virtuous citizen, on the conduct and character 
of his assembly? Or if there be a man who propensity to condemn is susceptible of no control, let 
me then ask what sentence he has in reserve for the twelve States who usurped the power of sending 
deputies to the convention, a body utterly unknown to their constitutions; for Congress, who 
recommended the appointment of this body, equally unknown to the Confederation; and for the 
State of New York, in particular, which first urged and then complied with this unauthorized 
interposition?  
But that the objectors may be disarmed of every pretext, it shall be granted for a moment that the 
convention were neither authorized by their commission, nor justified by circumstances in 
proposing a Constitution for their country: does it follow that the Constitution ought, for that reason alone, to be rejected? If, according to the noble precept, it be lawful to accept good advice even 
from an enemy, shall we set the ignoble example of refusing such advice even when it is offered by 
our friends? The prudent inquiry, in all cases, ought surely to be, not so much from whom the 
advice comes, as whether the advice be good.  
The sum of what has been here advanced and prove d is, that the charge against the convention of 
exceeding their powers, except in one instance little urged by the objectors, has no foundation to 
support it; that if they had exceeded their powers, they were not only warranted, but required, as the 
                                                 
29 Declaration of Independence.  
 133confidential servants of their country, by the circumstances in which they were placed, to exercise 
the liberty which they assumed; and that finally, if they had violated both their powers and their 
obligations, in proposing a Constitution, this ought neve rtheless to be embraced, if it be calculated 
to accomplish the views and happiness of the people of America. How far this character is due to 
the Constitution, is the subject under investigation.  
PUBLIUS  
 
