FEDERALIST 6 
Concerning Dangers From War Between the States by Alexander Hamilton   
THE three last numbers of this paper have been dedicated to an enumeration of the dangers to 
which we should be exposed, in a state of disunion, from the arms and arts of foreign nations. I shall now proceed to delineate dangers of a different and, perhaps, still more alarming kind - those which 
will in all probability flow from dissensions between the States themselves, and from domestic 
factions and convulsions. These have been already in  some instances slightly anticipated; but they 
deserve a more particular and more full investigation.   
 A man must be far gone in Utopian speculations w ho can seriously doubt that, if these States should 
either be wholly disunited, or only united in pa rtial confederacies, the subdivisions into which they 
might be thrown would have frequent and violent contests with each other. To presume a want of motives for such contests as an argument against their existence, would be to forget that men are 
ambitious, vindictive, and rapacious. To look for a continuation of harmony between a number of 
independent, unconnected sovereignties in the same neighborhood, would be to disregard the 
uniform course of human events, and to set at defiance the accumulated experience of ages.   
 The causes of hostility among nations are innumera ble. There are some which have a general and 
almost constant operation upon the collective bodies of  society. Of this description are the love of 
power or the desire of preeminence and dominion - the jealousy of power, or the desire of equality 
and safety. There are others which have a more circumscribed though an equally operative 
influence within their spheres. Such are the rivalships and competitions of commerce between commercial nations. And there are others, not less numerous than either of the former, which take 
their origin entirely in private passions; in the a ttachments, enmities, interests, hopes, and fears of 
leading individuals in the communities of which they are members. Men of this class, whether the 
favorites of a king or of a people, have in too ma ny instances abused the confidence they possessed; 
and assuming the pretext of some public motive, have not scrupled to sacrifice the national 
tranquillity to persona l advantage or persona l gratification.   
 
The celebrated Pericles, in compliance with the resentment of a prostitute
2, at the expense of much 
of the blood and treasure of his countrymen, attacked, vanquished, and destroyed the city of the 
Samnians. The same man, stimulated by  private pique against the Megarensians3, another nation of 
Greece, or to avoid a prosecution with which he was threatened as an accomplice in a supposed 
theft of the statuary of Phidias,4 or to get rid of the accusations prepared to be brought against him 
                                                 
2 Aspasia, vide Plutarch's Life of Pericles.  
3 Ibid. 
4 Ibid. Phidias was supposed to have stolen some public gold, with the connivance of Pericles, for the embellishment of 
the statue of Minerva.  
 15for dissipating the funds of the st ate in the purchase of popularity,5 or from a combination of all 
these causes, was the primitive author of that famous and fatal war, distinguished in the Grecian 
annals by the name of the Peloponnesian war; whic h, after various vicissit udes, intermissions, and 
renewals, terminated in the ruin of the Athenian commonwealth.   
 
The ambitious cardinal, who was prime minister to He nry VIII, permitting his vanity to aspire to the 
triple crown,6 entertained hopes of succeeding in the acquisition of that splendid prize by the 
influence of the Emperor Charles V. To secure the favor and interest of this enterprising and powerful monarch, he precipitated England into a war with France, contrary to the plainest dictates 
of policy, and at the hazard of the safety and independence, as well of the kingdom over which he 
presided by his counsels, as of Europe in general.  For if there ever was a sovereign who bid fair to 
realize the project of universal monarchy, it wa s the Emperor Charles V., of whose intrigues 
Wolsey was at once the instrument and the dupe.    
The influence which the bigotry of one female,
7 the petulance of another,8 and the cabals of a third,9 
had in the contemporary policy, ferments, and pacifi cations, of a considerable part of Europe, are to 
topics that have been too often descanted upon not to be generally known.   
 To multiply examples of the agency of personal  considerations in the production of great national 
events, either foreign or domestic, according to their direction, would be an unnecessary waste of 
time. Those who have but a superficial acquaintan ce with the sources from which they are to be 
drawn, will themselves recollect a variety of instances; and those who have a tolerable knowledge 
of human nature will not stand in need of such lights, to form their opinion either of the reality or 
extent of that agency. Perhaps, however, a reference, tending to illustrate the general principle, may 
with propriety be made to a case which has lately happened among ourselves. If Shays had not been 
a desperate debtor, it is much to be doubted whether Massachusetts would have been plunged into a civil war.    But notwithstanding the concurring testimony of experience, in this particular, there are still to be 
found visionary or designing men, who stand ready to advocate the paradox of perpetual peace 
between the States, though dismembered and alie nated from each other. The genius of republics 
(say they) is pacific; the spirit of commerce has a tendency to soften the manners of men, and to 
extinguish those inflammable humors which have so  often kindled into wars. Commercial republics, 
like ours, will never be disposed to waste themselv es in ruinous contentions with each other. They 
will be governed by mutual interest, and will cultivate a spirit of mutual amity and concord.   
 Is it not (we may ask these projectors in politics) the true interest of all nations to cultivate the same 
benevolent and philosophic spirit? If this be their true  interest, have they in fact pursued it? Has it 
not, on the contrary, invariably been found that momentary passions, and immediate interests, have 
a more active and imperious control over human c onduct than general or remote considerations of 
policy, utility, or justice? Have republics in practice been less addicted to war than monarchies? Are not the former administered by men as well as th e latter? Are there not aversions, predilections, 
                                                 
5 Ibid. 
6 Worn by the popes  
7 Madame de Maintenon.  
8 Duchess of Marlbourgh.  
9 Madame de Pompadour.  
 16rivalships, and desires of unjust acquisitions, that  affect nations as well as kings? Are not popular 
assemblies frequently subject to the impulses of rage, resentment, jealousy, avarice, and of other 
irregular and violent propensities? Is it not well known that their determinations are often governed by a few individuals in whom they place confidence, and are, of course, liable to be tinctured by the 
passions and views of those individuals? Has commerce hitherto done any thing more than change 
the objects of war? Is not the love of wealth as domineering and enterprising a passion as that of 
power or glory? Have there not been as many wars founded upon commercial motives since that has 
become the prevailing system of nations, as were before occasioned by the cupidity of territory or dominion? Has not the spirit of commerce, in many instances, administered new incentives to the 
appetite, both for the one and for the other? Let experience, the least fallible guide of human 
opinions, be appealed to for an answer to these inquiries.   
 
Sparta, Athens, Rome, and Carthage were all republics; two of them, Athens and Carthage, of the commercial kind. Yet were they as often engaged in wars, offensive and defensive, as the 
neighboring monarchies of the same times. Sparta  was little better than a well-regulated camp; and 
Rome was never sated of carnage and conquest.   
 
Carthage, though a commercial republic, was the aggressor in the very war that ended in her destruction. Hannibal had carried her arms into the heart of Italy and to the gates of Rome, before 
Scipio, in turn, gave him an overthrow in the territories of Carthage, and made a conquest of the 
commonwealth.    
Venice, in later times, figured more than once in wars of ambition, till, becoming an object to the 
other Italian states, Pope Julius II found means to accomplish that formidable league,
10 which gave 
a deadly blow to the power and pride of this haughty republic.   
 The provinces of Holland, till they were overwhelmed in debts and taxes, took a leading and conspicuous part in the wars of Europe. They had furious contests with England for the dominion of the sea, and were among the most persevering and most implacable of the opponents of Louis XIV.   
 
In the government of Britain the representatives of  the people compose one branch of the national 
legislature. Commerce has been for ages the pred ominant pursuit of that country. Few nations, 
nevertheless, have been more frequently engaged in war; and the wars in which that kingdom has 
been engaged have, in numerous instances, proceeded from the people.   
 
There have been, if I may so express it, almost as many popular as royal wars. The cries of the nation and the importunities of the representativ es have, upon various occasions, dragged their 
monarchs into war, or continued them in it, contrary to their inclinations, and sometimes contrary to 
the real interests of the state. In that memorable struggle for superiority between the rival houses of 
Austria and Bourbon, which so long kept Europe in a flame, it is well known that the antipathies of 
the English against the French, seconding the ambition,  or rather the avarice, of a favorite leader,
11 
protracted the war beyond the limits marked out by sound policy, and for a considerable time in 
opposition to the views of the court.   
 
                                                 
10 The League of Cambray, comprehending the Emperor, the King of France, the King of Aragon, and most of the 
Italian princes and states.  
11 The Duke of Marlborough.  
 17The wars of these two last-mentioned nations ha ve in a great measure grown out of commercial 
considerations, - the desire of supplanting and the fear of being supplanted, either in particular 
branches of traffic or in the general advantages of trade and navigation.  
 
From this summary of what has taken place in ot her countries, whose situations have borne the 
nearest resemblance to our own, what reason can we have to confide in those reveries which would 
seduce us into an expectation of peace and cordiality between the members of the present 
confederacy, in a state of separation? Have we not already seen enough of the fallacy and extravagance of those idle theories which have amused us with promises of an exemption from the 
imperfections, weaknesses, and evils incident to society in every shape? Is it not time to awake from 
the deceitful dream of a golden age, and to adopt as a practical maxim for the direction of our 
political conduct that we, as well as the other inhabitants of the globe, are yet remote from the 
happy empire of perfect wisdom and perfect virtue?    
Let the point of extreme depression to which our national dignity and credit have sunk, let the 
inconveniences felt everywhere from a lax and ill administration of government, let the revolt of a 
part of the State of North Carolina, the late mena cing disturbances in Pennsylvania, and the actual 
insurrections and rebellions in  Massachusetts, declare---!   
 
So far is the general sense of mankind from corres ponding with the tenets of those who endeavor to 
lull asleep our apprehensions of discord and hostility between the States, in the event of disunion, that it has from long observation of the progress of so ciety become a sort of axiom in politics, that 
vicinity, or nearness of situation, constitutes nations natural enemies. An intelligent writer expresses 
himself on this subject to this effect: "NEIGHBORING NATIONS [says he] are naturally enemies 
of each other, unless their common weakness  forces them to league in a CONFEDERATIVE 
REPUBLIC, and their constitution prevents the differences that neighborhood occasions, extinguishing that secret jealousy which disposes all states to aggrandize themselves at the expense of their neighbours."
12 This passage, at the same time, points out the EVIL and suggests the 
REMEDY.   
 
PUBLIUS    
 