FEDERALIST 62 
Concerning the Constitution of the Senate with  Regard To the Qualifications of the Members, 
the Manner of Appointing Them, the Equality of  Representation, the Number of the Senators 
and the Duration of Their Appointments  
by James Madison 
HAVING examined the constitution of the House of Representatives, and answered such of the 
objections against it as seemed to merit notice, I enter next on the examination of the Senate.  
The heads into which this member of the government may be considered are: I. The qualifications 
of senators; II. The appointment of them by the State legislatures; III. The equality of representation 
in the Senate; IV. The number of senators, and the term for which they are to be elected; V. The 
powers vested in the Senate.  
I. The qualifications proposed for senators, as dis tinguished from those of representatives, consist in 
a more advanced age and a longer period of citizens hip. A senator must be thirty years of age at 
least; as a representative must be twenty-five. And the former must have been a citizen nine years; 
as seven years are required for the latter. The propriety of these distinctions is explained by the 
nature of the senatorial trust, which, requiring greater extent of information and stability of 
character, requires at the same time that the senator should have reached a period of life most likely to supply these advantages; and which, particip ating immediately in transactions with foreign 
nations, ought to be exercised by none who are not thoroughly weaned from the prepossessions and 
habits incident to foreign birth and education. The term of nine years appears to be a prudent 
mediocrity between a total exclusion of adopted citizens, whose merits and talents may claim a 
share in the public confidence, and an indiscrimi nate and hasty admission of them, which might 
create a channel for foreign influence on the national councils.  
II. It is equally unnecessary to dilate on the a ppointment of senators by the State legislatures. 
Among the various modes which might have been devised for constituting this branch of the 
government, that which has been proposed by the convention is probably the most congenial with 
the public opinion. It is recommended by the d ouble advantage of favoring a select appointment, 
and of giving to the State governments such an agency in the formation of the federal government 
as must secure the authority of the former, and may form a convenient link between the two 
systems.  
 207III. The equality of representation in  the Senate is another point, wh ich, being evidently the result of 
compromise between the opposite pretensions of the large and the small States, does not call for 
much discussion. If indeed it be right, that amon g a people thoroughly incor porated into one nation, 
every district ought to have a proportional share in the government, and that among independent 
and sovereign States, bound together by a simple league, the parties, however unequal in size, ought 
to have an equal share in the common councils, it does not appear to be without some reason that in 
a compound republic, partaking both of the national and federal character, the government ought to 
be founded on a mixture of the principles of proportional and equal representation. But it is 
superfluous to try, by the standard of theory, a part of the Constitution which is allowed on all 
hands to be the result, not of theory, but "of a spirit of amity, and that mutual deference and 
concession which the peculiarity of our political situation rendered indispensable." A common 
government, with powers equal to its objects, is called for by the voice, and still more loudly by the 
political situation, of America. A government f ounded on principles more consonant to the wishes 
of the larger States, is not likely to be obtained from the smaller States. The only option, then, for 
the former, lies between the proposed governm ent and a government still more objectionable. 
Under this alternative, the advice of prudence must be to embrace the lesser evil; and, instead of 
indulging a fruitless anticipation of the possible mischiefs which may ensue, to contemplate rather the advantageous consequences which may qualify the sacrifice.  
In this spirit it may be remarked, that the equal vote allowed to each State is at once a constitutional 
recognition of the portion of sovereignty remaining in the individual States, and an instrument for preserving that residuary sovereignty. So far the equality ought to be no less acceptable to the large 
than to the small States; since they are not less solicitous to guard, by every possible expedient, against an improper consolidation of the States into one simple republic.  
Another advantage accruing from this ingredient in the Constitution of the Senate is, the additional 
impediment it must prove against improper acts of  legislation. No law or resolution can now be 
passed without the concurrence, first, of a majori ty of the people, and then , of a majority of the 
States. It must be acknowledged that this complicated check on legislation may in some instances 
be injurious as well as beneficial; and that the p eculiar defence which it involves in favor of the 
smaller States, would be more rational, if any in terests common to them, and distinct from those of 
the other States, would otherwise be exposed to peculiar danger. But as the larger States will always be able, by their power over the supplies, to defeat  unreasonable exertions of this prerogative of the 
lesser States, and as the facility and excess of lawmaking seem to be the diseases to which our 
governments are most liable, it is not impossible that this part of the Constitution may be more 
convenient in practice than it appears to many in contemplation.  
IV. The number of senators, and the duration of their appointment, come next to be considered. In 
order to form an accurate judgment on both these points, it will be proper to inquire into the 
purposes which are to be answered by a senate; and in order to ascertain these, it will be necessary 
to review the inconveniences which a republic must suffer from the want of such an institution.  
First. It is a misfortune incident to republican government, though in a less degree than to other 
governments, that those who administer it may forg et their obligations to their constituents, and 
prove unfaithful to their important trust. In this point of view, a senate, as a second branch of the 
legislative assembly, distinct from, and dividing the power with, a first, must be in all cases a 
salutary check on the government. It doubles the security to the people, by requiring the 
 208concurrence of two distinct bodies in schemes of  usurpation of perfidy, where the ambition or 
corruption of one would otherwise be sufficient. This is a precaution founded on such clear 
principles, and now so well understood in the United States, that it would be more than superfluous 
to enlarge on it. I will barely remark, that as the improbability of sinister combinations will be in 
proportion to the dissimilarity in the genius of the two bodies, it must be politic to distinguish them 
from each other by every circumstance which will consist with a due harmony in all proper 
measures, and with the genuine prin ciples of republican government.  
Secondly. The necessity of a senate is not less indicated by the propensity of all single and 
numerous assemblies to yield to the impulse of sudden and violent passions, and to be seduced by 
factious leaders into intemperate and pernicious resolutions. Examples on this subject might be cited without number; and from proceedings within the United States, as well as from the history of 
other nations. But a position that will not be contradicted, need not be proved. All that need be 
remarked is, that a body which is to correct this infirmity ought itself to be free from it, and 
consequently ought to be less numerous. It ought, moreover, to possess great firmness, and consequently ought to hold its authority by a tenure of considerable duration.  
Thirdly. Another defect to be supplied by a sena te lies in a want of due acquaintance with the 
objects and principles of legislation. It is not pos sible that an assembly of men called for the most 
part from pursuits of a private nature, continued in appointment for a short time, and led by no 
permanent motive to devote the intervals of public occupation to a study of the laws, the affairs, and 
the comprehensive interests of their country, should, if left wholly to themselves, escape a variety of 
important errors in the exercise of their legislat ive trust. It may be affirmed, on the best grounds, 
that no small share of the present embarrassments of America is to be charged on the blunders of our governments; and that these have proceeded from the heads rather than the hearts of most of the 
authors of them. What indeed are all the repeali ng, explaining, and amending laws, which fill and 
disgrace our voluminous codes, but so many monuments of deficient wisdom; so many impeachments exhibited by each succeeding against each preceding session; so many admonitions 
to the people, of the value of those aids which may be expected from a well-constituted senate?  
A good government implies two things: first, fidelity to the object of government, which is the 
happiness of the people; secondly, a knowledge of the means by which that object can be best 
attained. Some governments are deficient in both these qualities; most governments are deficient in 
the first. I scruple not to assert, that in American governments too little attention has been paid to 
the last. The federal Constitution avoids this error;  and what merits particular notice, it provides for 
the last in a mode which increases the security for the first.  
Fourthly. The mutability in the public councils arising from a rapid succession of new members, 
however qualified they may be, points out, in the strongest manner, the neces sity of some stable 
institution in the government. Every new election in the States is found to change one half of the 
representatives. From this change of men must proceed a change of opinions; and from a change of 
opinions, a change of measures. But a continual cha nge even of good measures is inconsistent with 
every rule of prudence and every prospect of succ ess. The remark is verified in private life, and 
becomes more just, as well as more important, in national transactions.  
To trace the mischievous effects of a mutable government, would fill a volume. I will hint a few 
only, each of which will be perceived to be a source of innumerable others.  
 209In the first place, it forfeits the respect and confidence of other nations, and all the advantages 
connected with national character. An individual w ho is observed to be inconstant to his plans, or 
perhaps to carry on his affairs without any plan at all, is marked at once, by all prudent people, as a speedy victim to his own unsteadiness and folly. His more friendly neighbors may pity him, but all 
will decline to connect their fortunes with his; and not a few will seize the opportunity of making 
their fortunes out of his. One nation is to another what one individual is to another; with this 
melancholy distinction perhaps, that the former, with fewer of the benevolent emotions than the 
latter, are under fewer restraints also from taki ng undue advantage from the indiscretion of each 
other. Every nation, consequently, whose affairs betray a want of wisdom and stability, may 
calculate on every loss which can be sustained form the more systematic policy of their wiser 
neighbors. But the best instruction on this subjec t is unhappily conveyed to America by the example 
of her own situation. She finds that she is held in  no respect by her friends ; that she is the derision 
of her enemies; and that she is a prey to every nation which has an interest in speculating on her 
fluctuating councils and embarrassed affairs.  
The internal effects of a mutable policy are still more calamitous. It poisons the blessing of liberty 
itself. It will be of little avail to the people, that the laws are made by men of their own choice, if the 
laws be so voluminous that they cannot be read, or so incoherent that they cannot be understood; if 
they be repealed or revised before they are prom ulgated, or undergo such incessant changes that no 
man, who knows what the law is today, can guess what it will be tomorrow. Law is defined to be a rule of action; but how can that be a rule, which is little known, and less fixed?  
Another effect of public instability is the unreasonable advantage it gives to the sagacious, the 
enterprising, and the moneyed few over the industrious and uninformed mass of the people. Every new regulation concerning commerce or revenue, or in any manner affecting the value of the 
different species of property, presents a new harv est to those who watch the change, and can trace 
its consequences; a harvest, reared not by themselves, but by the toils and cares of the great body of their fellow-citizens. This is a state of things in which it may be said with some truth that laws are 
made for the few, not for the many.  
In another point of view, great injury results from an unstable government. The want of confidence 
in the public councils damps every useful undertaking, the success and profit of which may depend 
on a continuance of existing arrangements. What prudent merchant will hazard his fortunes in any 
new branch of commerce when he knows not but that his plans may be rendered unlawful before 
they can be executed? What farmer or manufacturer will lay himself out for the encouragement given to any particular cultivation or establis hment, when he can have no assurance that his 
preparatory labors and advances will not render him a victim to an inconstant government? In a 
word, no great improvement or laudable enterprise  can go forward which requires the auspices of a 
steady system of national policy.  
But the most deplorable effect of all is that di minution of attachment and reverence which steals 
into the hearts of the people, towards a political system which betrays so many marks of infirmity; 
and disappoints so many of their flattering hopes. No government, any more than an individual, will long be respected without being truly respectable ; nor be truly respectable, without possessing a 
certain portion of order and stability.  
PUBLIUS 
 210