FEDERALIST 48 
The Same Subject Continued with a View to the Me ans of Giving Efficacy in Practice to That 
Maxim  
by James Madison 
IT WAS shown in the last paper that the political apothegm there examined does not require that the 
legislative, executive, and judiciary departments should be wholly unconnected with each other. I 
shall undertake, in the next place, to show that  unless these departments be so far connected and 
blended as to give to each a constitutional control over the others, the degree of separation which 
the maxim requires, as essential to a free government, can never in practice be duly maintained.  
It is agreed on all sides, that the powers properly belonging to one of the departments ought not to 
be directly and completely administered by either of the other departments. It is equally evident, 
that none of them ought to possess, directly or indi rectly, an overruling influence over the others, in 
the administration of their respective powers. It will not be denied, that power is of an encroaching 
nature, and that it ought to be effectually restrain ed from passing the limits assigned to it. After 
discriminating, therefore, in theory, the several classes of power, as they may in their nature be 
legislative, executive, or judiciary, the next and most difficult task is to provide some practical 
security for each, against the invasion of the others. What this security ought to be, is the great 
problem to be solved.  
Will it be sufficient to mark, with precision, the boundaries of these departments, in the constitution 
of the government, and to trust to these parchmen t barriers against the encroaching spirit of power? 
This is the security which appears to have been principally relied on by the compilers of most of the 
American constitutions. But experience assures us, that the efficacy of the provision has been 
 166greatly overrated; and that some more adequate defence is indispensably necessary for the more 
feeble, against the more powerful members of th e government. The legislative department is 
everywhere extending the sphere of its activity, and drawing all power into its impetuous vortex.  
The founders of our republics have so much merit for the wisdom which they have displayed, that 
no task can be less pleasing than that of pointi ng out the errors into which they have fallen. A 
respect for truth, however, obliges us to remark, th at they seem never for a moment to have turned 
their eyes from the danger to liberty from the overgrown and all-grasping prerogative of an 
hereditary magistrate, supported and fortified by an  hereditary branch of the legislative authority. 
They seem never to have recollected the danger from legislative usurpations, which, by assembling 
all power in the same hands, must lead to the same tyranny as is threatened by executive 
usurpations.  
In a government where numerous and extensive pr erogatives are placed in the hands of an 
hereditary monarch, the executive department is ve ry justly regarded as the source of danger, and 
watched with all the jealousy which a zeal for li berty ought to inspire. In a democracy, where a 
multitude of people exercise in person the legi slative functions, and are continually exposed, by 
their incapacity for regular deliberation and concerted measures, to the ambitious intrigues of their 
executive magistrates, tyranny may well be apprehended, on some favorable emergency, to start up in the same quarter. But in a representative republic, where the executive magistracy is carefully 
limited, both in the extent and the duration of its power; and where the legislative power is 
exercised by an assembly, which is inspired by  a supposed influence over the people, with an 
intrepid confidence in its own strength; which is sufficiently numerous to feel all the passions which 
actuate a multitude, yet not so numerous as to be incapable of pursuing the objects of its passions, by means which reason prescribes; it is against the enterprising ambition of this department that the 
people ought to indulge all their jealousy and exhaust all their precautions.  
The legislative department derives a superiority in our governments from other circumstances. Its 
constitutional powers being at once more extensive, and less susceptible of precise limits, it can, 
with the greater facility, mask, under complicated and indirect measures, the encroachments which 
it makes on the coordinate departments. It is not unf requently a question of real nicety in legislative 
bodies, whether the operation of a particular measure will, or will not, extend beyond the legislative 
sphere. On the other side, the executive power being restrained within a narrower compass, and 
being more simple in its nature, and the judiciar y being described by landmarks still less uncertain, 
projects of usurpation by either of these de partments would immediately betray and defeat 
themselves. Nor is this all: as the legislative department alone has access to the pockets of the 
people, and has in some constitutions full discre tion, and in all a prevailing influence, over the 
pecuniary rewards of those who fill the other departments, a dependence is thus created in the latter, 
which gives still greater facility to encroachments of the former.  
I have appealed to our own experience for the truth of what I advance on this subject. Were it 
necessary to verify this experience by particular proofs, they might be multiplied without end. I 
might find a witness in every citizen who has shared in, or been attentive to, the course of public administrations. I might collect vouchers in abundance from the records and archives of every State 
in the Union. But as a more concise, and at the same time equally satisfactory, evidence, I will refer to the example of two States, attested by two unexceptionable authorities.  
 167The first example is that of Virginia, a State which, as we have seen, has expressly declared in its 
constitution, that the three great departments ought not to be intermixed. The authority in support of 
it is Mr. Jefferson, who, besides his other advantages for remarking the operation of the government, was himself the chief magistrate of it. In order to convey fully the ideas with which his 
experience had impressed him on this subject, it will be necessary to quote a passage of some length 
from his very interesting "Notes on the State of Virginia," p. 195. "All the powers of government, 
legislative, executive, and judiciary, result to the legislative body. The concentrating these in the 
same hands, is precisely the definition of despotic government. It will be no alleviation, that these powers will be exercised by a plurality of hands, and not by a single one. One hundred and seventy-
three despots would surely be as oppressive as one. Let those who doubt it, turn their eyes on the 
republic of Venice. As little will it avail us, th at they are chosen by ourselves. An elective 
despotism was not the government we fought for; but one which should not only be founded on free 
principles, but in which the powers of government should be so divided and balanced among several bodies of magistracy, as that no one c ould transcend their legal limits, without being 
effectually checked and restrained by the others. For this reason, that convention which passed the 
ordinance of government, laid its foundation on this basis, that the legislative, executive, and 
judiciary departments should be separate and distin ct, so that no person should exercise the powers 
of more than one of them at the same time. But no barrier was provided between these several powers. The judiciary and the executive members were left dependent on the legislative for their 
subsistence in office, and some of them for their continuance in it. If, therefore, the legislature 
assumes executive and judiciary powers, no oppositi on is likely to be made; nor, if made, can be 
effectual; because in that case they may put thei r proceedings into the form of acts of Assembly, 
which will render them obligatory on the other branches. They have accordingly, in many instances, 
decided rights which should have been left to judiciary controversy, and the direction of the 
executive, during the whole time of their session, is becoming habitual and familiar."  
The other State which I shall take for an example is Pennsylvania; and the other authority, the 
Council of Censors, which assembled in the years 1783 and 1784. A part of the duty of this body, as 
marked out by the constitution, was "to inquire whether the constitution had been preserved inviolate in every part; and whether the legisl ative and executive branches of government had 
performed their duty as guardians of the people, or assumed to themselves, or exercised, other or 
greater powers than they are entitled to by the constitution." In the execution of this trust, the 
council were necessarily led to a comparison of bot h the legislative and executive proceedings, with 
the constitutional powers of these departments; and from the facts enumerated, and to the truth of most of which both sides in the council subscribed, it appears that the constitution had been 
flagrantly violated by the legislature in a variety of important instances.  
A great number of laws had been passed, violating, without any apparent necessity, the rule 
requiring that all bills of a public nature shall be previously printed for the consideration of the 
people; although this is one of the precautions chie fly relied on by the constitution against improper 
acts of the legislature.  
The constitutional trial by jury had been violated, and powers assumed which had not been 
delegated by the constitution. Executive powers had been usurped.  
 168The salaries of the judges, which the constituti on expressly requires to be fixed, had been 
occasionally varied; and cases belonging to the judiciary department frequently drawn within legislative cognizance and determination.  
Those who wish to see the several particulars falling under each of these heads, may consult the 
journals of the council, which are in print. Some of them, it will be found, may be imputable to peculiar circumstances connected with the war; but the greater part of them may be considered as 
the spontaneous shoots of an ill-constituted government.  
It appears, also, that the executive department had not been innocent of frequent breaches of the 
constitution. There are three obser vations, however, which ought to be made on this head: first, a 
great proportion of the instances were either immediately produced by the necessities of the war, or 
recommended by Congress or the commander-in-chief; secondly, in most of the other instances, 
they conformed either to the declared or the known sentiments of the legislative department; thirdly, the executive department of Pennsylvania is distinguished from that of the other States by the 
number of members composing it. In this respect, it has as much affinity to a legislative assembly as 
to an executive council. And being at once exempt from the restraint of an individual responsibility 
for the acts of the body, and deriving confidence from mutual example and joint influence, 
unauthorized measures would, of course, be mo re freely hazarded, than where the executive 
department is administered by a single hand, or by a few hands.  
The conclusion which I am warranted in drawing from these observations is, that a mere 
demarcation on parchment of the constitutional limits of the several departments, is not a sufficient 
guard against those encroachments which lead to a tyrannical concentration of all the powers of government in the same hands.  
PUBLIUS 
 
